Backup repo cache design (#9148)
vmware-tanzu/velero: design/backup-repo-cache-volume.md

- It is not a good bargain to have cache volumes for small backups, small backups will use resident cache location (the cache location in the root file system)
- The cache volume size should be based on the backup size, e.g., it is not a good bargain to have a a 10G cache volume for a 3G backup
- The cache volume size should not always be equivalent to the backup size, e.g., when the backup size is 1TB, and `cacheLimitMB` is set as `1024` (1G cache limit), it is meanlingless to create a cache volume of 1TB  

### Cache Volume Size

The cache volume size is calculated from below factors:  
- **Limit**: The limit of the cache data, that is represented by `cacheLimitMB`
- **ResidentThreshold**: The minimum backup size that a cache volume is created
- **InflationPercentage**: Considering the overhead of the file system and the possible delay of the cache cleanup, there should be an inflation for the final volume size vs. the logical size, otherwise, the cache volume may be overrun. This inflation percentage is hardcoded, e.g., 20%

> A fumula is as below:  

Author: Done

Payload data is highly related to the backup data, and normally take the majority of the repository data as well as the cache data.

Repository metadata is related to the backup repository's chunking algorithm, data chunk mapping method, etc, and so the size is not proportional to the backup data size.  
On the other hand for some backup repository, in extreme cases, the repository metadata may be significantly large. E.g., Kopia's indexes are per chunks, if there are huge number of small files in the repository, Kopia's index data may be in the same level of or even larger than the payload data.    
However, in the cases that repository metadata data become the majority, other bottlenecks may emerge and concurrency of data movers may be significantly constrained, so the requirement to cache volumes may go away.  

Therefore, for now we only consider the cache volume requirement for payload data, and leave the consideration for metadata as a future enhancement.  

### Scenarios

Backup repository cache varies on backup repositories and backup repository operation during VGDP runs. Below are the scenarios when VGDP runs:

> - Data Upload for Backup: this is the process to upload/write the backup data into the backup repository, e.g., DataUpload or PodVolumeBackup. The pieces of data is almost directly written to the repository, sometimes with small group and shot time stay in the local place. That is to say, there should not be large scale data cached for this scenario, so we don't prepare dedicated cache for this scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Data Upload for Backup: this is the process to upload/write the backup data into the backup repository, e.g., DataUpload or PodVolumeBackup. The pieces of data is almost directly written to the repository, sometimes with a small group, data will stay in the locally for a short time. That is to say, there should not be large scale data cached for this scenario, so we don't prepare dedicated cache for this scenario.
```

- Repository Maintenance: Repository maintenance most often visits the backup repository's metadata and sometimes it needs to visit the file system directories from the backed up data. On the other hand, it is not practical to run concurrent maintenance jobs in one node. So the cache data is neither large nor affect the root file system too much. Therefore, we don't need to prepare dedicated cache for this scenario.

> - Data Download for Restore: this is the process to download/read the backup data from the backup repository during restore, e.g., DataDownload or PodVolumeRestore. For backup repositories for which data are stored in remote backup storages (e.g., Kopia repository stores data in remote object stores), large scle of data are cached locally to accerlerate the restore. Therefore, we need dedicate cache volumes for this scenario.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Data Download for Restore: this is the process to download/read the backup data from the backup repository during restore, e.g., DataDownload or PodVolumeRestore. For backup repositories for which data are stored in remote backup storages (e.g., Kopia repository stores data in remote object stores), large scale of data are cached locally to accerlerate the restore. Therefore, we need dedicate cache volumes for this scenario.  
```

### Cache Data and Lifecycle

If available, one cache volume is dedicately assigned to one data mover pod. That is, the cached data is destroyed when the data mover pod completes. Then the backup repository instance also closes.    
Cache data are fully managed by the specific backup repository. So the backup repository may also have its own way to GC the cache data.  
That is to say, cache data GC may be launched by the backup repository instance during the running of the data mover pod; then the left data are automatically destroyed when the data mover pod and the cache PVC are destroyed. So no specially logics are needed for cache data GC.  

### Data Size

Cache volumes take storage space and cluster resources (PVC, PV), therefore, cache volumes should be created only when necessary and the volumes should be with reasonable size based on the cache data size:  
- It is not a good bargain to have cache volumes for small backups, small backups will use resident cache location (the cache location in the root file system)

> - The cache data size has a limit, the existing `cacheLimitMB` is used for this purpose. E.g., it could be set as 1024 for a 1TB backup, which means 1GB of data is cached and the old cache data exceeding this size will be cleared. Therefore, it is meaningless to set the cache volume size much larger than `cacheLimitMB`

Reviewer: Do you know if cache will work if limit is 5GB and backup is single 1TB file?

### Cache Volume Size

The cache volume size is calculated from below factors (for Restore scenarios):  
- **Limit**: The limit of the cache data, that is represented by `cacheLimitMB`, the default value is 5GB
- **backupSize**: The size of the backup as a reference to evaluate whether to create a cache volume. It doesn't mean the backup data really decides the cache data, it is just a reference to evaluate the scale of the backup, small scale backups may need small cache data
- **ResidentThreshold**: The minimum backup size that a cache volume is created
- **InflationPercentage**: Considering the overhead of the file system and the possible delay of the cache cleanup, there should be an inflation for the final volume size vs. the logical size, otherwise, the cache volume may be overrun. This inflation percentage is hardcoded, e.g., 20%

A formula is as below:  
```
cacheVolumeSize = (backupSize > residentThreshold ? limit : 0) * inflationPercentage
```

> Finally, the `cacheVolumeSize` will be rounded up to GiB considering the UX friendlyness, storage friendlyness and management friendlyness.    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the `cacheVolumeSize` will be rounded up to GiB considering the UX friendliness, storage friendliness and management friendliness.    
```

Author: Done

### PVC/PV

> The PVC for a cache volume is created in Velero namespace and a storage class is required for the cache PVC. The PVC's accessMode is `ReadWriteOnce` and volumeMode is `FileSystem`, so the storage class provided should support this specification. Otherwise, if the storageclass doesn't support either of the specifications, the data mover pod may be hang in `Pending` state until a timeout setting with the data movement (e.g. `prepareTimeout`) and the data movement will finally fail.  

Reviewer: Do we want to recover and retry without PVC then mark backup as partially failed?

Author: Data mover finally fails means the backup/restore goes to PartiallyFailed

Exposers mount the cache volume to a predefined directory and pass the directory to the data mover pods through the `cache-volume-path` parameter.  

Below data structure is added to the exposers' expose parameters:  

```go
type GenericRestoreExposeParam struct {
	// RestoreSize specifies the data size for the volume to be restored
	RestoreSize int64

	// CacheVolume specifies the info for cache volumes
	CacheVolume *CacheVolumeInfo
}

type PodVolumeExposeParam struct {
	// RestoreSize specifies the data size for the volume to be restored
	RestoreSize int64

	// CacheVolume specifies the info for cache volumes
	CacheVolume *repocache.CacheConfigs
}

type CacheConfigs struct {
	// StorageClass specifies the storage class for cache volumes
	StorageClass string

	// Limit specifies the maximum size of the cache data
	Limit int64

	// ResidentThreshold specifies the minimum size of the cache data to create a cache volume
	ResidentThreshold int64
}
```

### Data Mover Pods

> Data mover pods retrieve the cache volume directory from `cache-volume-path` parameter and pass it to Unified Repository.  

Reviewer: Can you give example when this directory path need customizing?

Author: This path doesn't need to be customized.
This is just a way for the exposer which creates the data mover pod passing the path to the VGDP running inside the data mover pod.
So this is not a visible flag to users. (it has been hidden)

- **ResidentThreshold**: The minimum backup size that a cache volume is created
- **InflationPercentage**: Considering the overhead of the file system and the possible delay of the cache cleanup, there should be an inflation for the final volume size vs. the logical size, otherwise, the cache volume may be overrun. This inflation percentage is hardcoded, e.g., 20%

A formula is as below:  
```
cacheVolumeSize = (backupSize != 0 ? (backupSize > residentThreshold ? limit : 0) : limit) * inflationPercentage
```
Finally, the `cacheVolumeSize` will be rounded up to GiB considering the UX friendliness, storage friendliness and management friendliness.    

### PVC/PV

The PVC for a cache volume is created in Velero namespace and a storage class is required for the cache PVC. The PVC's accessMode is `ReadWriteOnce` and volumeMode is `FileSystem`, so the storage class provided should support this specification. Otherwise, if the storageclass doesn't support either of the specifications, the data mover pod may be hang in `Pending` state until a timeout setting with the data movement (e.g. `prepareTimeout`) and the data movement will finally fail.  

> ### Cache Volume Configurations

Reviewer 2: so we'll only create the cache volume when the "cacheVolume" is not set in the config of node-agent?

`snapshotSize` field is added to DataUpload and PodVolumeBackup's `status`:
```yaml
          status:
              snapshotID:
                description: SnapshotID is the identifier for the snapshot in the
                  backup repository.
                type: string
              snapshotSize:
                description: SnapshotSize is the logical size of the snapshot.
                format: int64
                type: integer
```

`snapshotSize` field is also added to DataDownload and PodVolumeRestore's `spec`:
```yaml
          spec:
              snapshotID:
                description: SnapshotID is the ID of the Velero backup snapshot to
                  be restored from.
                type: string
              snapshotSize:
                description: SnapshotSize is the logical size of the snapshot.
                format: int64
                type: integer
```

`snapshotSize` represents the total size of the backup; during restore, the value is transferred from DataUpload/PodVolumeBackup to DataDownload/PodVolumeRestore.    

> When restoring from backups created by previous versions, `snapshotSize` is not available, according to the above formula, `residentThresholdMB` is ignored, cache volume size is calculated directly from cache limit for the corresponding backup repository.  

Reviewer 2: Per discussion, this is not needed b/c we can get the size of the backup even when `snapshotSize` is not set in the DU CR.

Author: Done
